<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML+RDFa 1.0//EN" "http://www.w3.org/MarkUp/DTD/xhtml-rdfa-1.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml"
    xmlns:xsd="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema#"
    xmlns:rdf="http://www.w3.org/1999/02/22-rdf-syntax-ns#"
    xmlns:rdfs="http://www.w3.org/2000/01/rdf-schema#"
    xmlns:owl="http://www.w3.org/2002/07/owl#"
    xmlns:rsa="http://www.w3.org/ns/auth/rsa#"
    xmlns:cert="http://www.w3.org/ns/auth/cert#"
    xmlns:dcterms="http://purl.org/dc/terms/"
    xmlns:foaf="http://xmlns.com/foaf/0.1/"
    xmlns:v="http://www.w3.org/2006/vcard/ns#"
    xmlns:cc="http://creativecommons.org/ns#"
    xmlns:dbr="http://dbpedia.org/resource/"
    xmlns:dbp="http://dbpedia.org/property/"
    xmlns:sioc="http://rdfs.org/sioc/ns#"
    xmlns:wgs="http://www.w3.org/2003/01/geo/wgs84_pos#"
    xmlns:cal="http://www.w3.org/2002/12/cal/ical#"
    xmlns:org="http://www.w3.org/ns/org#"
    xmlns:biblio="http://purl.org/net/biblio#"
    xmlns:bibo="http://purl.org/ontology/bibo/"
    xmlns:book="http://purl.org/NET/book/vocab#"
    xmlns:ov="http://open.vocab.org/terms/"
    xmlns:schema="http://schema.org/"
    xmlns:skos="http://www.w3.org/2004/02/skos/core#"
    xmlns:pimspace="http://www.w3.org/ns/pim/space#"
    xmlns:sio="http://semanticscience.org/resource/"
    xmlns:opmw="http://www.opmw.org/ontology/"
    xmlns:prov="http://www.w3.org/ns/prov#"
    xmlns:deo="http://purl.org/spar/deo/"
    xmlns:sro="http://salt.semanticauthoring.org/ontologies/sro#"

    xml:lang="en">
    <head>
        <title property="dcterms:title">Graphity: generic processor for declarative Linked Data applications</title>
        <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" media="all" href="http://csarven.ca/media/css/index.css"/>
	<link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" media="print" href="http://linked-research.270a.info/lncs.css"/>
    </head>

    <body about="http://csarven.ca/call-for-linked-research" typeof="foaf:Document sioc:Post biblio:Paper bibo:Document prov:Entity" id="article" class="hfeed">
        <div id="wrapper">

            <div class="main hentry">
<div>
                <h1 class="entry-title">Graphity: generic processor for declarative Linked Data applications</h1>

                <div id="authors">
                    <dl>
                        <dt>Authors</dt>
                        <dd id="author_1" class="entry-author author_corresponding"><a about="" rel="dcterms:creator dcterms:publisher dcterms:contributor" href="http://semantic-web.dk/#martynas">Martynas Jusevičius</a></dd>
                    </dl>

                    <ul id="author_uris">
                        <li id="author_uri_1"><a href="http://graphityhq.com/#company" class="author_uri">Graphity</a></li>
                    </ul>
                </div>

		<!--	
                <dl id="document-identifier">
                    <dt>Document ID</dt>
                    <dd><a href=""></a></dd>
                </dl>
		-->

                <dl id="document-submitted" class="on">
                    <dt>Published</dt>
                    <dd property="dcterms:published" content="2014-10-22T01:27:00+01:00">2014-10-22</dd>
<!--                    <dt>Modified</dt>-->
<!--                    <dd property="dcterms:modified" content="2014-07-28T09:00:00Z">2014-07-28</dd>-->
                </dl>

                <dl id="document-license">
                    <dt>License</dt>
                    <dd><a about="" rel="license cc:license" href="http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/" title="Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 Unported">CC BY-SA 4.0</a></dd>
                </dl>

		<!--
                <dl id="document-purpose">
                    <dt>Purpose</dt>
                    <dd property="schema:purpose">To encourage the &#8220;do it yourself&#8221; behaviour for sharing and reusing research knowledge.</dd>
                </dl>
		-->

				<div id="keywords">
					<h2>Keywords</h2>
					<ul rel="dcterms:subject">
						<li><a resource="http://dbpedia.org/resource/Linked_Data" href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linked_Data">Linked Data</a></li>
						<li><a resource="http://dbpedia.org/resource/Semantic_Web" href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Semantic_Web">Semantic Web</a></li>
						<li><a resource="http://dbpedia.org/resource/Resource_Description_Framework" href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Resource_Description_Framework">RDF</a></li>
						<li><a resource="http://dbpedia.org/resource/SPARQL" href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SPARQL">SPARQL</a></li>
					</ul>
				</div>

                <div property="dcterms:description" id="content" class="entry-content">
                    <h2 id="introduction" about="" rel="dcterms:hasPart" resource="#introduction">Introduction</h2>

                    <div about="#introduction" typeof="deo:Introduction" property="dcterms:description">
						<p>Database technologies have been evolving very rapidly in the last decade. Programming language design has also advanced, and there is growing focus on functional languages, which have better scalability and parallelism properties compared to <a href="https://www.fpcomplete.com/blog/2012/04/the-downfall-of-imperative-programming">traditional imperative languages</a>. However, the architecture of Web applications was designed with relational databases and object-oriented paradigms in mind, the combination of which suffers from object-relational impedance mismatch. Development by w</p>

						<p>With <a href="http://graphityhq.com/">Graphity</a>, we propose a declarative approach to Web applications, which maps read-write Linked Data HTTP access to SPARQL operations. The W3C has done related work <a href="http://www.w3.org/standards/techs/dwa">based on XML</a>, but has not applied it to RDF. The <a href="http://www.w3.org/TR/ldp/">Linked Data Platform</a> has similar aims, but is more general and does not force the mapping to SPARQL.</p>

						<p>We demonstrate that the declarative approach has multiple advantages:</p>

						<div about="#introduction" rel="dcterms:hasPart" resource="#advantages">
								<ol id="advantages" about="#advantages">
									<li id="code-to-data" about="#code-to-data" rel="dcterms:isPartOf" resource="#advantages" property="rdfs:label"><strong>moving code logic to data</strong> makes applications homoiconic, i.e. data can be managed using standard RDF tools and embedded in ontologies</li>

									<li id="generic-processor" about="#generic-processor" rel="dcterms:isPartOf" resource="#advantages" property="rdfs:label">the processor is generic, its code base is stateless and functional</li>

									<li id="declarative-apps" about="#declarative-apps" rel="dcterms:isPartOf" resource="#advantages" property="rdfs:label">declarative applications can run on different processors and platforms, can be imported from remote locations, merged, forked, managed collaboratively, transformed, queried etc.</li>
								</ol>
						</div>
				
						<p>The Graphity processor is open-source and works with any <a href="http://www.w3.org/TR/sparql11-query/">SPARQL 1.1</a> triplestore, while the commercial platform layer provides multi-tenant functionality such as access control and faceted search. It has been successfully used to build rich Linked Data applications for product information management and <a href="http://dedanskeaviser.dk">library data</a>, featuring interactive maps, faceted and text search, autocomplete and complex content creation and editing for authenticated users.</p>
					</div>

					<h2 id="approach" about="" rel="dcterms:hasPart" resource="#approach">Approach</h2>

					<div about="#approach" property="dcterms:description">
						<p>We propose a Linked Data application architecture that specifies how Linked Data HTTP access maps to SPARQL access on RDF stores. The configuration of both the Linked Data resources and the SPARQL queries is left to the application. In RESTful applications, resources that share the same URI structure usually share the same representation pattern. In our case, the representation is RDF, defined by SPARQL. This allows us to achieve a mapping between resource URIs and SPARQL queries.</p>
					</div>

					<h2 id="Implementation" about="" rel="dcterms:hasPart" resource="#Implementation">Implementation</h2>

					<div about="#implementation" property="dcterms:description">
						<p>All URI requests are first matched with an associated SPARQL query before fetching the data. The results may also be matched with a representation template before sending out the response.</p>

						<p>Applications are declaratively configured. There is a simple regex-like <a href="http://docs.oracle.com/cd/E19798-01/821-1841/6nmq2cp26/index.html">JAX-RS syntax for URI templates</a>, and a <a href="http://spinrdf.org/spin.html">SPIN RDF</a> syntax for SPARQL queries, we can define the mapping declaratively in an RDF ontology or vocabulary. The application might also need to produce representation types other than RDF. For example, (X)HTML output can be simply achieved via RDF/XML and XSLT on server and client-side.</p>

						<p>Writing RDF data can also be implemented in the same declarative fashion, using templates, OWL class restrictions, and SPIN data quality constraints. The last piece of the declarative read-write Linked Data loop is retrieving user input natively as RDF. Luckily, that is covered by <a href="http://www.lsrn.org/semweb/rdfpost.html">RDF/POST</a> which provides a way to encode RDF as standard HTML form inputs.</p>

						<p>Using Graphity Java implementation, application instance embeds the processor, which executes the RDF description on request. No domain-specific object layer is present: triplestore acts as MVC model via HTTP, and components operate on RDF natively and directly.</p>

						<p>We invite you to join the discussion at the <a href="http://www.w3.org/community/declarative-apps/">W3C Declarative Linked Data Apps Community Group</a></p>
					</div>
				
				</div>

</div>
	<dl class="article_labels">
		<dt>Hashtags</dt>
		<dd>
			<ul class="xoxo">
				<li><a rel="tag dcterms:subject" href="https://twitter.com/search?q=%23linkeddata">#linkeddata</a></li>
				<li><a rel="tag dcterms:subject" href="https://twitter.com/search?q=%23semanticweb">#semanticweb</a></li>
				<li><a rel="tag dcterms:subject" href="https://twitter.com/search?q=%23rdf">#rdf</a></li>
				<li><a rel="tag dcterms:subject" href="https://twitter.com/search?q=%23sparql">#sparql</a></li>
			</ul>
		</dd>
	</dl>
	<dl class="entry-author">
		<dt>Author</dt>
		<dd class="author vcard"><a rel="sioc:has_creator dcterms:creator dcterms:publisher prov:wasAttributedTo author" href="http://semantic-web.dk/#martynas" class="fn url">Martynas Jusevičius</a></dd>
	</dl>
		<dl class="datetimestamp">
			<dt>Published</dt>
			<dd><abbr property="dcterms:created prov:generatedAtTime" datatype="xsd:dateTime" content="2014-10-22T02:15:00+01:00" class="published updated" title="2014-10-22T02:15:00+01:00">2014-10-22</abbr></dd>
		</dl>

            </div>
	<div id="related_articles" class="aside">
		<h2>Related</h2>
		<ul class="xoxo">
			<li><a rel="bookmark dcterms:relation" href="https://github.com/Graphity/graphity-client/wiki/Reinventing-Web-applications" title="Article: Reinventing Web applications
">Reinventing Web applications
</a></li>
			<li><a rel="bookmark dcterms:relation" href="http://www.w3.org/2011/09/LinkedData/ledp2011_submission_1.pdf" title="Article: Graphity – A Generic Linked Data Platform">Graphity – A Generic Linked Data Platform</a></li>
			<li><a rel="bookmark dcterms:relation" href="http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nUbdcqgcHs4" title="Video: Graphity—generic Linked Data platform for interactive Web applications">Graphity—generic Linked Data platform for interactive Web applications</a></li>
		</ul>
	</div> 
 </div>

    </body>
</html>
